# C.04.1 Basic rules for Swiss Systems (effective from 1 February 2026)

**Source:** https://handbook.fide.com/chapter/C0401202507

**C. GENERAL RULES AND TECHNICAL RECOMMENDATIONS FOR TOURNAMENTS / 04. FIDE Swiss Rules / C.04.1 Basic rules for Swiss Systems / C.04.1 Basic rules for Swiss Systems (effective from 1 February 2026)**

---

**BASIC RULES FOR SWISS SYSTEMS**

**Approved by the Council on 28/10/2025**

**Applied from 1st February, 2026**

The following rules are valid for each Swiss system unless explicitly stated otherwise:

1. The number of rounds to be played is declared beforehand.

2. Two participants shall not play against each other more than once.

3. Should the number of participants to be paired be odd, one participant is not paired. This participant receives a pairing-allocated bye: no opponent, no colour and as many points as are rewarded for a win, unless the rules of the tournament state otherwise. This number of points shall be the same for all pairing-allocated byes.

4. A participant who has already received a pairing allocated bye, or has already scored in one single round, without playing, as many points as rewarded for a win, shall not receive the pairing allocated bye.

5. In general, participants are paired to others with the same score.

6. For each participant the difference between the number of rounds they play with Black and the number of rounds they play with White shall not be greater than 2 or less than -2. Each pairing system may have exceptions to this rule.

7. No participants shall receive the same colour three times in a row. Each pairing system may have exceptions to this rule.

8. In general, a participant is given the colour with which they played fewer rounds. If colours are already balanced, then, in general, the participant is given the colour that alternates from the last one with which they played.

9. The pairing rules must be such transparent that the person who is in charge for the pairing can explain them.
